AIP 39: Documentation (#17552)
mistercrunch/Airflow: docs/apache-airflow/howto/timetable.rst

    with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

 ..   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

 .. Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
    software distributed under the License is distributed on an
    "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
    KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
    specific language governing permissions and limitations
    under the License.

Customizing DAG Scheduling with Timetables
==========================================

A DAG's scheduling strategy is determined by its internal "timetable". This
timetable can be created by specifying the DAG's ``schedule_interval`` argument,
as described in :doc:`DAG Run </dag-run>`. The timetable also dictates the data
interval and the logical time of each run created for the DAG.

However, there are situations when a cron expression or simple ``timedelta``
periods cannot properly express the schedule. Some of the examples are:

* Data intervals with "holes" between. (Instead of continuous, as both the cron
  expression and ``timedelta`` schedules represent.)
* Run tasks at different times each day. For example, an astronomer may find it

>   useful to run a task at sunset to process data collected from the previous
>   sunlight period.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  useful to run a task at dawn to process data collected from the previous
  night-time period.
```

Seems more realistic :)

should usually start at the midnight one day prior to ``run_after``, but if
``run_after`` falls on a Sunday or Monday (i.e. the prior day is Saturday or
Sunday), it should be pushed further back to the previous Friday. Once we know
the start of the interval, the end is simply one full day after it. We then
create a :class:`~airflow.timetables.base.DataInterval` object to describe this
interval.

Next is the implementation of ``next_dagrun_info``:

.. exampleinclude:: /../../airflow/example_dags/example_workday_timetable.py
    :language: python
    :dedent: 4
    :start-after: [START howto_timetable_next_dagrun_info]
    :end-before: [END howto_timetable_next_dagrun_info]

This method accepts two arguments. ``last_automated_dagrun`` is a
``pendulum.DateTime`` object indicating the logical date of this DAG's previous
non-manually-triggered run, or ``None`` if this is the first time ever the DAG
is being scheduled. ``restriction`` encapsulates how the DAG and its tasks
specify the schedule, and contains three attributes:

* ``earliest``: The earliest time the DAG may be scheduled. This is a
  calculated ``pendulum.DateTime`` from all the ``start_date`` arguments from

>   the DAG and its tasks, or ``Non`` of there are no ``start_date`` arguments

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  the DAG and its tasks, or ``None`` if there are no ``start_date`` arguments
```

> * ``earliest``: The earliest time the DAG may be scheduled. This is a
>   calculated ``pendulum.DateTime`` from all the ``start_date`` arguments from
>   the DAG and its tasks, or ``None`` oi there are no ``start_date`` arguments
>   found at all.

Author: ```suggestion
* ``earliest``: The earliest time the DAG may be scheduled. This is a
  ``pendulum.DateTime`` calculated from all the ``start_date`` arguments from
  the DAG and its tasks, or ``None`` if there are no ``start_date`` arguments
  found at all.
```

    (the *start* of the data interval), not when the run will be scheduled
    (usually after the end of the data interval).

If there was a run scheduled previously, we should now schedule for the next
weekday, i.e. plus one day if the previous run was on Monday through Thursday,
or three days if it was on Friday. If there was not a previous scheduled run,
however, we pick the next workday's midnight after ``restriction.earliest``
(unless it *is* a workday's midnight; in which case it's used directly).
``restriction.catchup`` also needs to be considered---if it's ``False``, we
can't schedule before the current time, even if ``start_date`` values are in the
past. Finally, if our calculated data interval is later than
``restriction.latest``, we must respect it and not schedule a run by returning
``None``.

If we decide to schedule a run, we need to describe it with a
:class:`~airflow.timetables.base.DagRunInfo`. This type has two arguments and
attributes:

* ``data_interval``: A :class:`~airflow.timetables.base.DataInterval` instance
  like ``infer_data_interval``'s return value. This describes the next run's
  data interval.

> * ``run_after: A ``pendulum.DateTime`` instance that tells the scheduler when

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``run_after``: A ``pendulum.DateTime`` instance that tells the scheduler when
```

  the DAG run can be scheduled.

.. note::

    In case you're wondering---yes, the argument and return value of
    ``infer_data_interval`` are also internally combined into a ``DagRunInfo``.

A ``DagRunInfo`` can be created like this:

.. code-block:: python

    info = DagRunInfo(
        data_interval=DataInterval(start=start, end=end),
        run_after=run_after,
    )

> But since we typically wan to schedule a run as soon as the data interval ends,

Author: ```suggestion
But since we typically want to schedule a run as soon as the data interval ends,
```

``end`` and ``run_after`` above are generally the same. ``DagRunInfo`` therefore
provides a shortcut for this:

.. code-block:: python

    info = DagRunInfo.interval(start=start, end=end)
    assert info.data_interval.end == info.run_after  # Always True.

For reference, here's our DAG file in its entirety:

.. exampleinclude:: /../../airflow/example_dags/example_workday_timetable.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: [START howto_timetable]
    :end-before: [END howto_timetable]

DAG Serialization and Parameterized Timetables
----------------------------------------------

Sometimes we need to pass some run-time arguments to the timetable. Continuing

> with out ``AfterWorkdayTimetable``, maybe we may have DAGs running on different

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with our ``AfterWorkdayTimetable`` example, maybe we may have DAGs running on different
```

> with our ``AfterWorkdayTimetable`` example, maybe we may have DAGs running on

Author: ```suggestion
with our ``AfterWorkdayTimetable`` example, maybe we have DAGs running on
```

    class SometimeAfterWorkdayTimetable(Timetable):
        def __init__(self, schedule_at: Time) -> None:
            self._schedule_at = schedule_at

        def next_dagrun_info(self, last_automated_dagrun, restriction):
            ...
            end = start + timedelta(days=1)
            return DagRunInfo(
                data_interval=DataInterval(start=start, end=end),
                run_after=DateTime.combine(end.date(), self._schedule_at).replace(
                    tzinfo=end.tzinfo
                ),
            )

However, since the timetable is a part of the DAG, we need to tell Airflow how
to serialize it with the context we provide in ``__init__``. This is done by
implementing two additional methods on our timetable class:

.. code-block:: python

    def serialize(self) -> Dict[str, Any]:
        return {"schedule_at": self._schedule_at.isoformat()}

    @classmethod
    def deserialize(cls, value: Dict[str, Any]) -> Timetable:
        return cls(Time.fromisoformat(value["schedule_at"]))

When the DAG is being serialized, ``serialize`` is called to obtain a
JSON-serializable value. That value is passed to ``deserialize`` when the

> serialized DAG is accessed by the scheduler to reconstruct the timetable.

Reviewer: (Looks fine, but this code isn't landed yet, right?)

Author: Yes, I’m anticipating the actual code change in #17414.

Reviewer: There might be a thing we need to add there about "registering" the class too, but we can add that to the docs when we decide.

is the first time ever the DAG is being scheduled. ``restriction`` encapsulates
how the DAG and its tasks specify the schedule, and contains three attributes:

* ``earliest``: The earliest time the DAG may be scheduled. This is a
  ``pendulum.DateTime`` calculated from all the ``start_date`` arguments from
  the DAG and its tasks, or ``None`` if there are no ``start_date`` arguments
  found at all.
* ``latest``: Similar to ``earliest``, this is the latest time the DAG may be
  scheduled, calculated from ``end_date`` arguments.
* ``catchup``: A boolean reflecting the DAG's ``catchup`` argument.

.. note::

    Both ``earliest`` and ``latest`` apply to the DAG run's logical date
    (the *start* of the data interval), not when the run will be scheduled
    (usually after the end of the data interval).

If there was a run scheduled previously, we should now schedule for the next
weekday, i.e. plus one day if the previous run was on Monday through Thursday,
or three days if it was on Friday. If there was not a previous scheduled run,
however, we pick the next workday's midnight after ``restriction.earliest``
(unless it *is* a workday's midnight; in which case it's used directly).

> ``restriction.catchup`` also needs to be considered---if it's ``False``, we

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``restriction.catchup`` also needs to be considered - if it's ``False``, we
```

Author: Sphinx renders triple-dash as an em-dash by default. This can be disabled, but from what I can tell we currently have it on.

https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/configuration.html#confval-smartquotes

Reviewer: emdash ftw. Nice typography makes me happy.

Reviewer 2: Ah, cool, TIL. Do we want `<space>---<space>` then so we have spaces?

Author: I quickly searched and there doesn’t seem to be an established rule (both are generally accepted), so I’ll defer this to whatever the majority of reviewers think.

Reviewer: The LaTeX author in me says no spaces, but I don't have a strong preference.

can't schedule before the current time, even if ``start_date`` values are in the
past. Finally, if our calculated data interval is later than
``restriction.latest``, we must respect it and not schedule a run by returning
``None``.

If we decide to schedule a run, we need to describe it with a
:class:`~airflow.timetables.base.DagRunInfo`. This type has two arguments and
attributes:

* ``data_interval``: A :class:`~airflow.timetables.base.DataInterval` instance
  describing the next run's data interval.
* ``run_after``: A ``pendulum.DateTime`` instance that tells the scheduler when
  the DAG run can be scheduled.

A ``DagRunInfo`` can be created like this:

.. code-block:: python

    info = DagRunInfo(
        data_interval=DataInterval(start=start, end=end),
        run_after=run_after,
    )

> But since we typically want to schedule a run as soon as the data interval ends,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, since we typically want to schedule a run as soon as the data interval ends,
```

Or just start with "Since"?

            return cls(Time.fromisoformat(value["schedule_at"]))

When the DAG is being serialized, ``serialize`` is called to obtain a
JSON-serializable value. That value is passed to ``deserialize`` when the
serialized DAG is accessed by the scheduler to reconstruct the timetable.

Timetable Display in UI
=======================

By default, a custom timetable is displayed by their class name in the UI (e.g.
the *Schedule* column in the "DAGs" table. It is possible to customize this
by overriding the ``summary`` property. This is especially useful for
parameterized timetables to include arguments provided in ``__init__``. For
our ``SometimeAfterWorkdayTimetable`` class, for example, we could have:

.. code-block:: python

    @property
    def summary(self) -> str:
        return f"after each workday, at {self._schedule_at}"

So for a DAG declared like this:

.. code-block:: python

    with DAG(
        timetable=SometimeAfterWorkdayTimetable(Time(8)),  # 8am.
        ...,
    ) as dag:
        ...

The *Schedule* column would say ``after each workday, at 08:00:00``.

.. seealso::

    Module :mod:`airflow.timetables.base`

>         The public interface is heavily documented to explain what they should

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        The public interface is heavily documented to explain what should
```

    "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
    with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

 ..   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

 .. Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
    software distributed under the License is distributed on an
    "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
    KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
    specific language governing permissions and limitations
    under the License.

Customizing DAG Scheduling with Timetables
==========================================

A DAG's scheduling strategy is determined by its internal "timetable". This
timetable can be created by specifying the DAG's ``schedule_interval`` argument,
as described in :doc:`DAG Run </dag-run>`. The timetable also dictates the data
interval and the logical time of each run created for the DAG.

However, there are situations when a cron expression or simple ``timedelta``
periods cannot properly express the schedule. Some of the examples are:

* Data intervals with "holes" between. (Instead of continous, as both the cron
  expression and ``timedelta`` schedules represent.)

> * Run tasks on different times each day. For example, an astronomer may find it
>   useful to run a task on each sunset, to process data collected from the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Run tasks at different times each day. For example, an astronomer may find it
  useful to run a task at sunset to process data collected from the
```

  previous sunlight period.
* Schedules not following the Gregorian calendar. For example, create a run for
  each month in the `Traditional Chinese Calendar`_. This is conceptually
  similar to the sunset case above, but for a different time scale.
* Rolling windows, or overlapping data intervals. For example, one may want to
  have a run each day, but make each run cover the period of the previous seven
  days. It is possible to "hack" this with a cron expression, but a custom data

>   interval would task specification more natural.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  interval would be a more natural representation.
```

Or

```suggestion
  interval would make the task specification more natural.
```

Author: I chose the first one

.. _`Traditional Chinese Calendar`: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese_calendar

> For our example, let's say a company may want to run a job after each weekday,
> to process data collected during the work day. The first intuitively answer

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For our example, let's say a company wants to run a job after each weekday
to process data collected during the work day. The first intuitive answer
```

to this would be ``schedule_interval="0 0 * * 1-5"`` (midnight on Monday to
Friday), but this means data collected on Friday will *not* be processed right

> after Friday, but on the next Monday, and that run's interval would be from

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
after Friday ends, but on the next Monday, and that run's interval would be from
```

midnight Friday to midnight *Monday*.

> This is, therefore, a case of the "holes" category; the intended schedule should
> leave the two weekend days. What we want is:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is, therefore, an example in the "holes" category above; the intended schedule should
not include the two weekend days. What we want is:
```

* Schedule a run for each Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday. The

>   run's data interval would cover from the midnight of each day, to the midnight

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  run's data interval would cover from midnight of each day, to midnight
```

>   of the next day.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  of the next day (e.g. 2021-01-01 00:00:00 to 2021-01-02 00:00:00).
```

Maybe add an example?
